This is Birmingham, once the home of renowned scientist and minister Joseph Priestley.
In 1789, Priestley joined forces with a group of talented individuals
to start work on a new translation of the Bible into English.
For the past 200 years, this project was assumed to have failed and all work considered lost.
How was this translation different? And why was it never published?
We spoke to several scholars to uncover the story of Priestley and his translation project.
He's best known today for his work in science in electricity and gases,
particularly in uncovering the properties of oxygen.
Well, Joseph Priestley was an extraordinary man.
He's now these days remembered really as a scientist,
but that's not as he would have wanted to be remembered.
He would have wanted to be remembered as a minister of religion, as a theologian,
and that was his great passion.
He is somebody who could pick up languages, who had a prodigious memory,
an enormous capacity for hard work.
He learnt Hebrew early on, probably around the age of 15,
and then went on to learn, as well as Greek and Latin,
he also learnt the major Semitic languages that were available in those days.
That was an enormous help when it came to his reinvestigation of biblical texts,
because he could compare the King James's version of the Bible with original texts in original languages.
There were multiple manuscripts, both of the Hebrew texts and of the Greek texts,
which were now available and showed that sometimes the text that the authorised version was based on,
was not the only reading available.
I think it's fairly clear where the language of the King James was wonderful.
It does have mistranslations, it does have interpolations,
it does have errors of translation in it.
Priestley was an independent thinker, searching for truth.
There was one truth he considered most important,
that the scriptures describe Almighty God as being distinct from Jesus.
In 1783, he published this pamphlet which reads,
the scriptures teach us that there is but one God,
who is himself the maker and the governor of all things.
That this one God is the sole object of worship,
and that he sent Jesus Christ to instruct mankind,
empowered him to work miracles, raised him from the dead,
and gave him all the power that he ever was or is now possessed of.
Priestley felt that the authorised version blurred this distinction between God and Christ.
So, in 1787, he reached out to his closest friend,
a minister named Theophilus Lindsay.
Lindsay began as an Anglican clergyman, but he gradually began to question notions such as the Trinity.
He was coming to an understanding of theology in the same direction that Priestley was.
Priestley wrote to Lindsay,
I am glad that you seem pleased with the idea of a new translation of the Bible.
It does not appear to me to be a very formidable undertaking,
and if you will do the New Testament, I will engage for the Old.
In three years, it may be done very well.
To finish the project in three years was an ambitious target.
The King James Version had taken 47 scholars seven years to complete.
So, Priestley and Lindsay joined with two fellow scholars to start planning the project.
Their plan was to improve the King James Version
by changing only those passages that required a more accurate rendering.
The group agreed to a set of rules to guide the translation work.
One of those rules would make this translation different from any other Bible that had ever been published in English,
or possibly in any language up to that time.
The rule was simple.
To let God's name, as it appears in Hebrew, be rendered as Jehovah,
rather than the word Lord in the Old Testament.
And to use the name Jehovah in the New Testament,
where it may be proper to distinguish God from Christ.
This was not a new idea.
Here we have a book by Hopton Haynes.
Some 40 years prior to Priestley's translation project,
he proposed the very same approach.
Haynes believed that in the King James Version,
the original word Jehovah should have remained untranslated
and that if the word Jehovah had been used in the New Testament,
where the word Lord is often used,
this might have secured a proper distinction between the Lord our God and our Lord or Master Christ.
Priestley's team agreed with that idea.
Recognizing that they were in need of more assistance,
they began reaching out to other scholars for help,
not many accepted.
They had reason to be cautious.
Preparing a new Bible translation in 18th century England was more than ambitious.
It was potentially dangerous.
Producing any translation at this time was a very sensitive issue.
A number of people had begun translations,
but often never finished them.
The Church of England was built upon the King James Version.
This was the version the church authorized.
This was the version on which the church theology derived.
So it was a theological opposition.
If you were going to say the translation was not sufficient,
and if you bring in a new translation, you are saying we have a new theology,
which is contrary to the Church of England.
Within three months of the initial planning meeting,
other like-minded scholars offered to help,
including a man whose talents would prove invaluable,
Robert Edward Garnam.
We're now in Cambridge, where we asked Dr. Nicholas Bell and Dr. Chris Reed
to tell us more about Garnam and his work.
Robert Garnam came to Trinity as a student at the age of 16 in 1769.
He was then admitted as a scholar a year later,
and in due course, himself became a fellow of the college.
A lot of his work could have happened here in the Ren Library in Trinity College.
The library by Garnam's time was probably still not completely full,
but more than half would have been editions of the Bible
and biblical commentaries of the theological texts.
So to have all the tools you need for a very deep theological work,
readily to hand in one building,
would have been a significant advantage.
Priestly and Lindsay valued his contributions to that extremely highly,
because he was such an acute intellect,
but combined with that, he was an incredibly hard worker.
I think to see that this particular preacher
had studied the text of the Bible in quite such steps
is really quite an important revelation.
Garnam worked quietly, but he also worked quickly.
He finished his original assignment,
translating the letters of the New Testament,
and then took on even more.
In a letter to Lindsay dated November 25, 1789,
priestly observed,
Mr. Garnam is a valuable member of our core.
Lindsay later acknowledged to another member of the team
that no one's labors are beyond those of Mr. Garnam.
The improved Bible that priestly and his team had been hoping for
was finally inching toward completion.
And then, the Birmingham riots of 1791
were among the most violent to erupt in 18th century Britain.
In addition to their controversial political views,
priestly and other non-conformists had openly challenged
the beliefs of the church.
To Anglican clergymen, that made them a threat and a target.
Four days of violence left several writers dead
and destroyed many buildings, including priestly's home.
His house at Fair Hill was completely burnt down.
He was very lucky to escape.
And his papers were thrown literally out of the window.
All his manuscripts, his books,
and it does seem as if his translation did not survive.
Priestly left England in 1794 for the United States.
He was isolated geographically, isolated socially and culturally.
He was in a really difficult position.
Having lost his library, and without a team to support him,
priestly was unable to continue with his translation project.
He never took it up again.
But what about Garnam and his translation work?
The answer to that question lies in London.
Garnam had cautiously only ever published his many writings anonymously.
So after rioters destroyed priestly's home and the project was abandoned,
Garnam left his work unpublished.
In the years that followed, Garnam's attitude toward the Bible changed,
and his faith diminished dramatically.
He died in 1802 at the age of 49.
But what about his translation work?
Did any of the manuscripts survive?
For more than 200 years, the answer seemed to be no.
But early in 2017, research has made an unexpected discovery
at the Doctor Williams Library in central London.
What exactly did they find?
Two sets of well-preserved manuscripts,
which together comprised almost the entire New Testament.
One a rough draft, and the other a more polished version.
And one of them was clearly signed with the initials R-E-G.
Robert Edward Garnam.
As researchers examined these newly discovered manuscripts,
they realized they had found something extraordinary.
The only surviving manuscript from priestly's project ever to have been found.
I think it's very unusual to find a manuscript of this nature
because not many of them survive anyway.
And therefore, I think that's why it's remarkable.
Garnam's translation was unique in a number of ways,
with fresh modern renderings of many familiar verses.
Where the King James version states that,
the whole world lieth in wickedness.
Garnam's version says,
the whole world is in the power of the adversary,
rather than use the word hell.
Garnam translated the Greek word Hades as the grave.
But perhaps most of the worthy is Garnam's use of the name Jehovah.
Where the King James version says,
thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart.
Garnam wrote,
thou shalt love Jehovah thy God with all thy heart.
Where as other translations use God's name only a handful of times.
Garnam followed the team's translation rules
and used the name Jehovah some two hundred times throughout the New Testament.
We had always assumed this translation had been lost at that point.
So the finding of Garnam's New Testament translation amongst his papers,
amongst our collection was a revelation, a great surprise.
The manuscripts in the Doctor Williams library are terribly exciting.
This was a translation undertaken by real scholars who knew their Hebrew and Greek.
It's absolutely fascinating and it needs bringing to a wider audience.
The work that Garnam left behind brings to light a thrilling chapter in the history of the Bible.
An 18th century English translation of the New Testament
that had it been published would have been truly groundbreaking.